index.md, before:

---
layout: lesson
root: .  # Is the only page that doesn't follow the pattern /:path/index.html
permalink: index.html  # Is the only page that doesn't follow the pattern /:path/index.html
---

{% include gh_variables.html %}

For guidelines on how to develop curriculum content, please visit
[The Carpentries Curriculum Development Handbook][curriculum-handbook].

This lesson shows how to use [The Carpentries]({{ site.carpentries_site}})
lesson template. The materials below assume familiarity with tools such as GitHub, Markdown,
and Jekyll. For more guidance, please visit the [Technological introductions][tech-intro]
section of The Carpentries Curriculum Development Handbook.

For guidelines on how to help improve our lessons and this template,
please see [the contribution guidelines][contributing];
for guidelines on how to set up your machine to preview changes locally,
please see [the setup instructions]({{ page.root }}{% link setup.md %}).

> ## Prerequisites
>
> Use the `.prereq` style to specify prerequisites.
{: .prereq}

> ## Ten Things You Need To Know
>
> 0.  Don't panic.
> 1.  Create a new lesson by using GitHub Import, *not* by forking.
> 2.  Run `bin/lesson_initialize.py` *once* in a new lesson repository to set up standard files.
> 3.  Run `make lesson-check` to check that the lesson is formatted correctly.
> 4.  Put lesson episodes in `_episodes` (or `_episodes_rmd` if you are writing in RMarkdown).
> 5.  Run `make serve` to preview the lesson website locally.
> 6.  Do *not* commit the generated HTML files in the `_site` directory.
> 7.  Style blocks and code samples by putting `{: .stylename}` on a newline *after* the block or
      code.
> 8.  Put solutions inside challenges using nested blockquotes.
> 9.  File issues and template fixes in the [styles repository][styles],
>     and enhancements to this documentation in this one.
{: .checklist}

[curriculum-handbook]: https://carpentries.github.io/curriculum-development/
[tech-intro]: https://carpentries.github.io/curriculum-development/technological-introductions.html

{% include links.md %}

Commit message:

begun to edit ep01, as well as index file

index.md, after:

---
layout: lesson
root: .  # Is the only page that doesn't follow the pattern /:path/index.html
permalink: index.html  # Is the only page that doesn't follow the pattern /:path/index.html
---

{% include gh_variables.html %}

This OTN-hosted training will provide OTN-style Node Managers with an overview of the steps to take and tools to use to 1) ensure data is formatted correctly and free form errors, 2) injest data into the Database Node and 3) create any relevant data products to Node members.

Attendees should be detail oriented, in-tune with their local telemetry communities, and not afraid to ask questions!


> ## Prerequisites
>
> A computer on which you have Admin privilages.
> A second monitor to use in addition to your regular computer screen.
> A notebook or note-taking software.
> A device with Zoom installed, to attend the training. 
{: .prereq}

> ## Ten Things You Need To Know
>
> 0.  This will be a lot of information - don't worry if you need more time!
> 1.  OTN is always available to assist you as a Data Manager - you're not doing this alone.
> 2.  If there is a tool that isn't working for you, please let us know so we can improve.
> 3.  Happy to hear all feedback!
{: .checklist}

{% include links.md %}
