_episodes/10_The Push.md, before:

---
title: "Data Push"
teaching: 10
exercises: 0
questions:
- "What is a Data Push?"
- "What do I need to do as a Node Manager for a Data Push?"
- "What are the end products of a Data Push?"
objectives:
- "Understand a basic overview of a Data Push"
- "Understand what a Node Manager's responsibilities are during a Data Push"
- "Understand the format of Detection Extracts"
keypoints:
- "A Data Push is when we verify all the data in the system, fix any issues, and then provide detection matches to researchers"
- "As Node Managers its your responsibility to get the data into the system so OTN can verify and get it ready to be sent out"
- "Detection Extracts are the main end product of the Push"
---

## What it a Data Push?

A Data Push is when the OTN data system is re-verified and any new relevant information is sent to researchers. New data being brought in is cut off so that what's in the system can be reliably verified. This way any issues found can be fixed and the data can be in the best form based on the information available at that moment. Once verification is done detections are matched across nodes and detection extracts are sent out to researchers. This is also the time when summary schemas like `discovery`, `erddap`, and `geoserver` are updated with the newly verified and updated data.

## What is the Push Schedule?

Push events happen **three** times a year. They start on the third Thursday of the "push month" which are February, June, and October. This date is the cut-off date for all data-loading: no records can be loaded after this.

With the increased number of Nodes joining the Pushes, we are announcing the schedule for the next year. Please prepare in advance and mark your calendars.

Push schedule through 2023:
- June 23, 2022
- October 20, 2022
- February 16, 2023
- June 15, 2023
- October 19, 2023

## Node Manager Roles During a Push

Node Managers have two main jobs during a Push:
1. The first job is to get the Node's data loaded in time for the cut-off date. Data will be submitted by researchers on a continuous basis, but will likely increase just before a cut-off date. We recommend loading data as it arrives, to attempt to prevent a backlog near the Push date.
1. The second job for Node Managers is to create and send out Detection Extracts when they are ready to be made. This will be done using the `detections - create detection extracts` notebook.

Once the cut-off date has passed Node Managers are "off duty"! When it's time for Detection Extracts to be created and disseminated that task will be assigned to the Node Managers, but this does **not** signify the end of the Push. There are several more "behind the scenes" steps required.

Please refrain from interacting with the Node Database until OTN staff have announced the Push has ended and data may be loaded again.

## Detection Extracts

[Detection Extracts](https://members.oceantrack.org/data/otn-detection-extract-documentation-matched-to-animals) are the main output of the Push. They contain all the new detection matches for each project. There are multiple types of detection extracts OTN creates:
- 'qualified' which contain detections collected by an array but matched to animals of other projects
- 'unqualified' which contain the unmatched or mystery detections collected by an array
- 'sentinel' which contain the detections matched to test or transceiver tags collected by an array
- 'tracker' which contains detections that have been mapped to animals tagged by a project that can originate from any receiver in the entire Network

Detection Extract files are formatted for direct ingestion by analysis packages such as [*glatos*](https://github.com/ocean-tracking-network/glatos) and [*resonate*](https://gitlab.oceantrack.org/otndc/resonate).  


# Detections - Create Detection Extracts Notebook

During the Push process, any new detection matches that are made are noted in the `obis.detection_extracts_list` table of your Node. These entries will have several pieces of useful information:
- `detection_extract`: this contains the project code, year, and type of extract that needs to be created.
    * ex: `ABC,2022,t` will suggest that project ABC needs the extract `matched to animals 2022` (tracker format) created.
- `git_issue_link`: the issue in which these detection matches were impacted
- `push_date`: the date of the Push when this extract will have to be made

Using these fields, the `detections-create detection extracts` notebook can determine which extracts need to be created for each push.

### Imports cell

This section will be common for most Nodebooks: it is a cell at the top of the notebook where you will import any required packages and functions to use throughout the notebook. It must be run first, every time.

There are **no** values here which need to be edited.

### User Inputs Database Connection

1. `outputdir = 'C:/Users/path/to/detection extracts/folder/'`
	* Within the quotes, please paste a filepath to the folder in which you'd like to save all the Detection Extracts.
1. `engine = get_engine()`
	* Within the open brackets you need to open quotations and paste the path to your database `.kdbx` file which contains your login credentials.
	* On MacOS computers, you can usually find and copy the path to your database `.kdbx` file by right-clicking on the file and holding down the "option" key. On Windows, we recommend using the installed software Path Copy Copy, so you can copy a unix-style path by right-clicking.
	* The path should look like `engine = get_engine(‘C:/Users/username/Desktop/Auth files/database_conn_string.kdbx’)`.

Once you have added your information, you can run the cell. Successful login is indicated with the following output:

~~~
Auth password:········
Connection Notes: None
Database connection established
Connection Type:postgresql Host:db.your.org Database:your_db User:node_admin Node: Node
Testing dblink connections:
	nep-on-fact: DBLink established on user@fact.secoora.org:1234 - Node: FACT
	nep-on-migramar: DBLink established on user@db.load.oceantrack.org:1234 - Node: MIGRAMAR
	nep-on-otn: DBLink established on user@db.load.oceantrack.org :1234 - Node: OTN
	nep-on-saf: DBLink established on user@db.load.oceantrack.org:1234 - Node: SAF
	nep-on-act: DBLink established on user@matos.asascience.com:1234 - Node: ACT
~~~
{: .language-bash}

You may note that there are multiple `DB links` required here: this is so that you will be able to include detection matches from all the Nodes. If your `kdbx` file doesn't include any of your DB link account, reach out to OTN to help set it up for you.

### Detection Extract Selection

There are two options for selecting which Detection Extracts to create:

1. There is a `manual entry` cell. Here you can paste a list of extracts in this format (one per line):
    * project code (capitals), year, type
2. There is a cell to query the `obis.detection_extracts_list` table. This is the preferred method.
    * enter the current Push date like `push_date = 'YYYY-MM-DD'`

Once you have a list of the Detection Extracts to create, you can move on. The next cell will create a list of all the extracts that were just created, which you can use for your own records. It will save in your `ipython-utilities` folder.

### Create Detection Extracts

This cell will begin creating the identified detection extracts, one by one. You will be able to see a summary of the matched projects for each extract. Please wait for them all to complete - indicated by a **green checkmark** and a summary of the time it took to complete the extract.

**The following section is for Nodes who use Plone as their document management system only**

> ### Uploading Extracts to Plone
>
> First the notebook will print a list of all the extracts that need to be uploaded. It should match the list of those just created.
>
> Next, you will need to connect to Plone using a `.auth` file. The format will be like this: `plone_auth_path = r'C:/path/to/Plone.auth'`. Success will be indicated with this message:
>
> ~~~
> Plone authorization was successful.
> Connected to 'https://members.oceantrack.org' as 'USER'
> ~~~
> {: .language-plaintext .example}
>
> Now the notebook will upload all the Detection Extracts into their relevant folders on Plone.
>
> Please wait for them all to complete - indicated by a **green checkmark** and a summary of the time it took to complete the extract.
>
> ### Emailing Researchers - Plone
> Using the Plone users system, its possible to identify which researchers require an email notification.
> First you need to supply a `.auth` file for an email account. The format will be like this: `email_auth_path = r'C:/path/to/email.auth'`. Success will be indicated with this message:
> ~~~
> Email auth is set:
>  user= otndc@dal.ca
>  host= smtp.office365.com
>  cc= otndc@dal.ca
>  port= XXX
> ~~~
> {: .language-plaintext .example}
> Upon successful login, you will be able to print out your current email template. If it is not adequate, you can edit the template by changing the `det_extracts_emailSpecial.j2` template in the `templates` subfolder of `ipython-utilities, and changing the filepath to be `email_template = 'templates/det_extracts_emailSpecial.j2'`, the re-running.
> Finally, this stage will send the emails. First: set `send_mail = False.`
> Run the cell, select the projects of interest and `Simulate Sending Emails`.
> If you are pleased with the output, you can then set `send_mail = True` and re-run. Choose `Send Emails` and they will be sent.

### Emailing Researchers - Manual

If you are not using the Plone system for sending emails, you can use the `manual` email tool.

You will first enter the collectioncode which has the new Detection Extract file requiring notification: `cntct_schema = 'schema'`. Please edit to include the project code, in lowercase, between the quotation marks.

An interactive menu will then appear, listing all the contacts associated with the project. You can select each of those you'd like to email.

The following cell will print out the resulting contact list.

Next, you will be able to review the email template. Required input includes:
- `email_auth_path = '/path/to/email.auth'`: please paste the filepath to your email `.auth` between the quotes.
- `template = './emailtools/templates/email_researcher.html'` : you can select the template you'd like to use. If the ones provided are not adequate, you can edit the template by changing the `email_researcher.html` template by navigating from the `ipython-utilities` main folder to `emailtools` then into the `templates` folder. Save your edited file and re-run

If the email preview is acceptable, you may run the final cell in this section which will send the emails.

### Update Extract Table

Once all extracts are made, uploaded to your file management system and emails have been sent to researchers, the final step is to ensure we mark in the `obis.detection_extracts_list` table that we have completed these tasks.

Please enter `current_push_date = 'yyyy-mm-dd` : the date of the Push when these extracts have been made.

Then, an interactive dataframe will appear. This dataframe will allow you to check-off the extracts as `completed` based on those you were able to successfully create.

Now you're done with Detection Extracts until next Push!

Commit message:

edited based on notebook bug fixes

_episodes/10_The Push.md, after:

---
title: "Data Push"
teaching: 10
exercises: 0
questions:
- "What is a Data Push?"
- "What do I need to do as a Node Manager for a Data Push?"
- "What are the end products of a Data Push?"
objectives:
- "Understand a basic overview of a Data Push"
- "Understand what a Node Manager's responsibilities are during a Data Push"
- "Understand the format of Detection Extracts"
keypoints:
- "A Data Push is when we verify all the data in the system, fix any issues, and then provide detection matches to researchers"
- "As Node Managers its your responsibility to get the data into the system so OTN can verify and get it ready to be sent out"
- "Detection Extracts are the main end product of the Push"
---

## What it a Data Push?

A Data Push is when the OTN data system is re-verified and any new relevant information is sent to researchers. New data being brought in is cut off so that what's in the system can be reliably verified. This way any issues found can be fixed and the data can be in the best form based on the information available at that moment. Once verification is done detections are matched across nodes and detection extracts are sent out to researchers. This is also the time when summary schemas like `discovery`, `erddap`, and `geoserver` are updated with the newly verified and updated data.

## What is the Push Schedule?

Push events happen **three** times a year. They start on the third Thursday of the "push month" which are February, June, and October. This date is the cut-off date for all data-loading: no records can be loaded after this. Please aim to have all tickets ready for verification **1 week** before this date.

With the increased number of Nodes joining the Pushes, we are announcing the schedule for the next year. Please prepare in advance and mark your calendars.

Push schedule through 2023:
- June 23, 2022
- October 20, 2022
- February 16, 2023
- June 15, 2023
- October 19, 2023

## Node Manager Roles During a Push

Node Managers have two main jobs during a Push:
1. The first job is to get the Node's data loaded in time for the cut-off date. Data will be submitted by researchers on a continuous basis, but will likely increase just before a cut-off date. We recommend loading data as it arrives, to attempt to prevent a backlog near the Push date.
1. The second job for Node Managers is to create and send out Detection Extracts when they are ready to be made. This will be done using the `detections - create detection extracts` notebook.

Once the cut-off date has passed Node Managers are "off duty"! When it's time for Detection Extracts to be created and disseminated that task will be assigned to the Node Managers, but this does **not** signify the end of the Push. There are several more "behind the scenes" steps required.

Please refrain from interacting with the Node Database until OTN staff have announced the Push has ended and data may be loaded again.

## Detection Extracts

[Detection Extracts](https://members.oceantrack.org/data/otn-detection-extract-documentation-matched-to-animals) are the main output of the Push. They contain all the new detection matches for each project. There are multiple types of detection extracts OTN creates:
- 'qualified' which contain detections collected by an array but matched to animals of other projects
- 'unqualified' which contain the unmatched or mystery detections collected by an array
- 'sentinel' which contain the detections matched to test or transceiver tags collected by an array
- 'tracker' which contains detections that have been mapped to animals tagged by a project that can originate from any receiver in the entire Network
- 'external partners' which is a report with suggested matches to the mystery-tag layers provided by non-Node partner networks. Summary detection information, including a count of the number of potential matches per project is provided. These matches are meant as a starting point for gaining information from non-Node telemetry networks. Researchers will have to contact those networks directly for more detailed information, and to register.

Detection Extract files are formatted for direct ingestion by analysis packages such as [*glatos*](https://github.com/ocean-tracking-network/glatos) and [*resonate*](https://gitlab.oceantrack.org/otndc/resonate).  


# Detections - Create Detection Extracts Notebook

During the Push process, any new detection matches that are made are noted in the `obis.detection_extracts_list` table of your Node. These entries will have several pieces of useful information:
- `detection_extract`: this contains the project code, year, and type of extract that needs to be created.
    * ex: `ABC,2022,t` will suggest that project ABC needs the extract `matched to animals 2022` (tracker format) created.
- `git_issue_link`: the issue in which these detection matches were impacted
- `push_date`: the date of the Push when this extract will have to be made

Using these fields, the `detections-create detection extracts` notebook can determine which extracts need to be created for each push.

### Imports cell

This section will be common for most Nodebooks: it is a cell at the top of the notebook where you will import any required packages and functions to use throughout the notebook. It must be run first, every time.

There are **no** values here which need to be edited.

### User Inputs Database Connection

1. `outputdir = 'C:/Users/path/to/detection extracts/folder/'`
	* Within the quotes, please paste a filepath to the folder in which you'd like to save all the Detection Extracts.
1. `engine = get_engine()`
	* Within the open brackets you need to open quotations and paste the path to your database `.kdbx` file which contains your login credentials.
	* On MacOS computers, you can usually find and copy the path to your database `.kdbx` file by right-clicking on the file and holding down the "option" key. On Windows, we recommend using the installed software Path Copy Copy, so you can copy a unix-style path by right-clicking.
	* The path should look like `engine = get_engine(‘C:/Users/username/Desktop/Auth files/database_conn_string.kdbx’)`.

Once you have added your information, you can run the cell. Successful login is indicated with the following output:

~~~
Auth password:········
Connection Notes: None
Database connection established
Connection Type:postgresql Host:db.your.org Database:your_db User:node_admin Node: Node
Testing dblink connections:
	saf-on-fact: DBLink established on user@fact.secoora.org:5002 - Node: FACT
	saf-on-migramar: DBLink established on user@db.load.oceantrack.org:5432 - Node: MIGRAMAR
	saf-on-nep: DBLink established on user@db.load.oceantrack.org:5432 - Node: NEP
	saf-on-otn: DBLink established on user@db.load.oceantrack.org:5432 - Node: OTN
	saf-on-act: DBLink established on user@matos.asascience.com:5432 - Node: ACT
	saf-on-pirat: DBLink established on user@161.35.98.36:5432 - Node: PIRAT
	saf-on-path: DBLink established on user@fishdb.wfcb.ucdavis.edu:5432 - Node: PATH
~~~
{: .language-bash}

You may note that there are multiple `DB links` required here: this is so that you will be able to include detection matches from all the Nodes. If your `kdbx` file doesn't include any of your DB link accounts, reach out to OTN to help set it up for you. 

### Detection Extract Selection

There are two options for selecting which Detection Extracts to create:

1. There is a `manual entry` cell. Here you can paste a list of extracts in this format (one per line):
    * project code (capitals), year, type
2. There is a cell to query the `obis.detection_extracts_list` table. This is the preferred method.
    * enter the current Push date like `push_date = 'YYYY-MM-DD'`

Once you have a list of the Detection Extracts to create, you can move on. The next cell will create a list of all the extracts that were just created, which you can use for your own records. It will save in your `ipython-utilities` folder.

### Create Detection Extracts

This cell will begin creating the identified detection extracts, one by one. You will be able to see a summary of the matched projects for each extract. Please wait for them all to complete - indicated by a **green checkmark** and a summary of the time it took to complete the extract.

**The following section is for Nodes who use Plone as their document management system only**

> ### Uploading Extracts to Plone
>
> First the notebook will print a list of all the extracts that need to be uploaded. It should match the list of those just created.
>
> Next, you will need to connect to Plone using a `.auth` file. The format will be like this: `plone_auth_path = r'C:/path/to/Plone.auth'`. Success will be indicated with this message:
>
> ~~~
> Plone authorization was successful.
> Connected to 'https://members.oceantrack.org' as 'USER'
> ~~~
> {: .language-plaintext .example}
>
> Now the notebook will upload all the Detection Extracts into their relevant folders on Plone.
>
> Please wait for them all to complete - indicated by a **green checkmark** and a summary of the time it took to complete the extract.
>
> ### Emailing Researchers - Plone
> Using the Plone users system, its possible to identify which researchers require an email notification.
> First you need to supply a `.auth` file for an email account. The format will be like this: `email_auth_path = r'C:/path/to/email.auth'`. Success will be indicated with this message:
> ~~~
> Email auth is set:
>  user= otndc@dal.ca
>  host= smtp.office365.com
>  cc= otndc@dal.ca
>  port= XXX
> ~~~
> {: .language-plaintext .example}
> Upon successful login, you will be able to print out your current email template. If it is not adequate, you can edit the template by changing the `det_extracts_emailSpecial.j2` template in the `templates` subfolder of `ipython-utilities`, and changing the filepath to be `email_template = 'templates/det_extracts_emailSpecial.j2'`, then re-running.
>
> Finally, this stage will send the emails. Ensure that `date = 'YYYY-MM-DD'` for the date you **uploaded** the extracts to Plone. This is how the notebook will determine which links to include in the email template.
> First: set `send_mail = False`. Run the cell, select the projects of interest and `Simulate Sending Emails`.
> If you are pleased with the output, you can then change `send_mail = True` and re-run. Choose `Send Emails` and they will be sent.

### Emailing Researchers - Manual

If you are not using the Plone system for sending emails, you can use the `manual` email tool.

You will first enter the collectioncode which has the new Detection Extract file requiring notification: `cntct_schema = 'schema'`. Please edit to include the project code, in lowercase, between the quotation marks.

An interactive menu will then appear, listing all the contacts associated with the project. You can select each of those you'd like to email.

The following cell will print out the resulting contact list.

Next, you will be able to review the email template. Required input includes:
- `email_auth_path = '/path/to/email.auth'`: please paste the filepath to your email `.auth` between the quotes.
- `template = './emailtools/templates/email_researcher.html'` : you can select the template you'd like to use. If the ones provided are not adequate, you can edit the template by changing the `email_researcher.html` template by navigating from the `ipython-utilities` main folder to `emailtools` then into the `templates` folder. Save your edited file and re-run

If the email preview is acceptable, you may run the final cell in this section which will send the emails.

### Update Extract Table

Once all extracts are made, uploaded to your file management system and emails have been sent to researchers, the final step is to ensure we mark in the `obis.detection_extracts_list` table that we have completed these tasks.

Please enter `current_push_date = 'yyyy-mm-dd'` : the date of the Push when these extracts have been made.

Then, an interactive dataframe will appear. This dataframe will allow you to check-off the extracts as `completed` based on those you were able to successfully create.

Now you're done with Detection Extracts until next Push!
